---
title: Using CircleCI to test Drupal
tags:
- automated testing
- CI
- Drupal
categories:
    - Drupal
description: A tutorial for building and testing Drupal on CircleCI.
---
[Circleci][circle] is another straight-forward continuous integration and deployment service that integrates easily with github.

[circle]:https://circleci.com

Here is what my `circle.yml` for running my tests against Drupal 7 looks like:

    machine:
      environment:
        SERVER: your-project.local
      php:
        version: 5.5.21
      hosts:
        SERVER: 127.0.0.1

    dependencies:
      pre:
        - cp cnf/circle.conf /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo sed -e "s?%HOME%?$(pwd)?g" --in-place /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo sed -e "s?%PROJECT_DIR%?www?g" --in-place /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo sed -e "s?%SERVER%?SERVER?g" --in-place /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo a2enmod rewrite
        - sudo service apache2 restart
        - cp cnf/settings.php www/sites/default
      override:
        - composer install --prefer-dist
      post:
        - sudo chown -R $(whoami):www-data www
        - build/install.sh

       test:
          override:
              - bin/behat -f pretty
              - cd www && ../bin/drush fl | grep -qi 'overridden' && (echo 'Feature override test: fail' && exit 0) || (echo 'Feature override: pass' && exit 1)

As always, actually reading the [circleci documentation][documentation] will decrypt most of this for you, including variable names ("machine", "pre", "override", etc.). So with an RTFM error premtively thrown, here nonetheless is roughly what is being accomplished:

[documentation]:https://circleci.com/docs/configuration

At the very top, I am setting some project-specific tunables since I want to reuse essentially same `circle.yml` for every project. This is a personal preference but has the virtue of allowing me to share my `circle.yml` with others.

~~~php
    machine:
      environment:
        SERVER: your-project.local
      php:
        version: 5.5.21
      hosts:
        SERVER: 127.0.0.1
~~~

I am creating a custom variable called `SERVER` that corresponds to the localhost alias of my project. After specifying the php requirement for my project, I am establishing this `SERVER` variable as my host. I refer again to my host when setting up the virtualhost.

Next we have the project setup, the bulk of which is apache2 configuration:

~~~php
dependencies:
      pre:
        - cp cnf/circle.conf /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo sed -e "s?%HOME%?$(pwd)?g" --in-place /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo sed -e "s?%PROJECT_DIR%?www?g" --in-place /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo sed -e "s?%SERVER%?SERVER?g" --in-place /etc/apache2/sites-available/default
        - sudo a2enmod rewrite
        - sudo service apache2 restart
~~~

The two most important actions here are setting a virtualhost for your project so that apache2 knows where the Drupal in order to serve it up and the enabling of `rewrite`, which Drupal needs.

My virtualhost config is stored inside `circle.conf` within a directory called `cnf` where it is then copied into apache2's `sites-available`. Here is what my generic `circle.conf` looks like, complete with Rewrite configurations:

    <VirtualHost *:80>
        UseCanonicalName Off
        DocumentRoot %HOME%/%PROJECT_DIR%
        ServerName %SERVER%

      <Directory %HOME%/*>
        Options FollowSymLinks
        AllowOverride None
        RewriteEngine On
        RewriteBase /
        RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
        RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d
        RewriteRule %HOME%/%PROJECT_DIR%/(.*)$ index.php/?q=$1 [L,QSA]
        Order allow,deny
        Allow from all
      </Directory>

      <Directory />
        Options FollowSymLinks
        AllowOverride None
      </Directory>
    </VirtualHost>

Notice that I am replacing out the placeholders inside `circle.yml` with tubables that I am setting at the top of the `circle.yml`. (I am assuming that your drupal root lives inside `www` of your project root). Of course, all that `sudo sed -e` replacement is completely unnecessary if you just hard-code in the circleci and your project's directory paths. Again, I have found it easier to use the same virtualhost file for each project and replace the globals.

Next we copy in a `settings.php` with circleci variables that Drupal can bootstrap:

~~~php
        - cp cnf/settings.php www/sites/default
~~~

Here is what my settings.php looks like:

    <?php

    $databases['default']['default'] = array(
          'driver' => 'mysql',
           'database' => 'circle_test',
           'username' => 'ubuntu',
           'password' => '',
           'host' => '127.0.0.1',
           'prefix' => '',
           );

Next we are installing the project's dependencies with composer:

        - composer install --prefer-dist

You will at least need drush to build your project. If your tests are in behat, as mine are, you will need that as well.

Finally, I build my project with a bash script (a series of drush commands inside `install.sh`), run my behat test suite, and check that there are no features overridden.

Now go forth and make your Drupal build explicit, repeatable, and testable.
